# Docker 101 Training

Have you ever struggled with getting an application up and running? You find
this awesome project and you want to run it but in order to do you need to have
this language/platform installed on your machine? You have to figure out how to
install that tool and setup your PATH correctly. Or maybe you already have that
language/tool installed on your machine but it's the wrong version. I know I've
had these problems. An example I have is the Java build tool Maven.

Let's demo how this works. I do not have Maven on my MacBook.

    which mvn # outputs "mvn not found"

But I do have it inside this Docker image `maven:alpine`.

    docker run -it --rm maven:alpine /bin/bash

Now let's get a Maven project that I can build as an example.

    cd ~/Projects/miscellaneous/
    git clone https://github.com/kevinsawicki/github-maven-example.git
    cd example
    ls

Here we see that we have a Maven project, `pom.xml` and a `src/` directory.
There is no `target/` directory yet. However, we can build this projcet with
the following command.

    docker run --rm -v "${PWD}:/data" -w /data maven:alpine mvn clean verify

What just happened!? I was able to build a project on my machine
installing/configuring Maven.

Let's go over what just happened in the last two docker commands I ran.

    docker run

This is the basic of running your first Docker container. Up until this point,
we deal with Docker images. the `maven:alpine` is an image (a blueprint if you
will). The class definition to a container's class instance.

    docker images

This lists all images that I have on my machine. Docker will search the
publicly configured registries (docker.io) for the image and pull it down. You
can configure it look in your own private registry or specify the registry when
referencing an image.

    docker pull docker.io/library/ruby:2.3

The next part of the command that we ran `-it` tells docker to run the
container in `interactive` and `teletypewriter` mode (gives you a shell within
the container). The `--rm` option that we passed to the container says to clean
up/remove the container once we are done working with it. Otherwise it remain
around, visible when we do a `docker ps -a`. We currently see nothing as I have
cleaned up every container I have run so far.

    docker run -it centos:7

In separate terminal, we can see that if we run `docker ps` we see our
container running and the details about it. If we now exit the container and
run our `docker ps`, we will see no containers currently running. By adding the
`-a` flag, it will show all containers, running or stopped.

The `maven:alpine` part of the very first command we ran is the name of the
image on our machine that we would like to execute. Docker will look for this
image on local disk first and if it cannot find it, will search the configured
registries and pull down the image at "runtime". So if I run `docker run
gradle:latest`, I do not have this image locally, so it will search the
registries and pull it down and then run the container. Finally, the last piece
of the command is `/bin/bash`, this is the command that we want to execute
inside the container. So since I combined all the commands to put me in an
interactive mode in a shell in the `maven:alpine` image, with `/bin/bash`, I
will be dropped into bash in the container.

Let's now add the new pieces of the second command I ran when I actually built
the project with maven in the container. The `-v "${PWD}:/data"` tells us that
we are going to create a volume inside this container at `/data` with the
current directory `$PWD` on our host machine. This means that both our machine
and the docker container will have access to read/write to the files in the
directory. It also means, that anything added to this container in the `/data`
directory will be persisted on our machine after the container has exited. This
is very important because containers by nature and default are ephemeral. Once
they exit and are cleaned up, no longer contain those changes. The `-w /data`
means that our current working directory inside the container is `/data/`.
Finally, instead of executing `/bin/bash`, we actually want to execute the `mvn
clean verify` command to clean the project, build and verify it (please see
documentation on the Maven lifecycle if you want to know everything that
happens when that command is run).

Docker Toolbox:

https://www.docker.com/products/docker-toolbox

Docker for Mac Download:

https://docs.docker.com/docker-for-mac/

Docker for Windows Download:

https://docs.docker.com/docker-for-windows/

Docker Hub:

https://hub.docker.com/

### Docker visuals:

VMs vs Docker container:

https://www.brianchristner.io/content/images/2016/03/vm-vs-docker-container.png

Docker container interaction with Kernel:

https://axibase.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/07/basic_arch2.png

File system:

https://lh6.googleusercontent.com/QkPJAtqPBVgM5zYPBP1R08xf4VzBWFX6XKmD5A9FA7kFXoyY_p0srZBxMgLnr4DG3EH86psP4GHxxwM4w4EcxSlJIc2uvqKw84HLCjh4VoRSE9hY8KhQRxTblUJTJW8MGwMymfuN
